Glossary
--------


Physical Domain
  A region in space, time and objects (stars / gas clouds) that can be 
  described by a set of physical models. A physical domain is a 
  limited description of the physics of a stellar system. For example 
  in the gravity domain the gravitational forces are taken into 
  account but not the evolution of stars or the hydrodynamics of th 
  interstellar medium
  
Module
  Interface to a code in AMUSE. Also, file containing python definitions. 
  These definitions can be imported into the main Python program

Unit test
  Automatic test case for a part of the code. For example one can 
  define a unit tests that checks the result of one method given a 
  specified argument.

Application
  A script that combines modules into a multi-physical simulator.
  
Run
  During a run the physical models are evolved to a wanted end state. 
  A run can end when a certain model time has passed. For example, one 
  can run a script until the age is 12 million years.
  
Evolve
  Work out / develop the physical model equations. Usually, small steps 
  in time are taken, the new state of the system is calculated from the 
  previous state.

Step
  An identifiable stage in a run or evolve. A code can take multiple 
  steps during one evolve step. A step can be the integrator step, 
  force calculation step.
  
Data-model
  A single representation model for data of different physical codes.

Set
  A collection of identifyable objects (for example all stars in a 
  globular cluster). Every value in the set can be seen as belonging
  to an object.
  
Grid
  A collection of identifyable locations or regions (for example a box 
  of interstellar medium with a density, molecular composition). Every 
  value in the collection can be seen as belongin to a specific
  location (x,y,z point).

Code
  A computer program to solve or approximate the equations of state of 
  a physical domain. Codes are usually written in Fortran or C/C++. 
  For example 'sse' is a code to perform stellar evolution.
  
Production Code
  A code used for modelling stellar systems and described in published 
  articles.
  
Toy Code
  A code with limited accurancy but that is easy to use.
  
Numerical Experiment
  
SPH, smoothed particle hydrodynamics
  A computational method used for simulating fluid flows

AMR, adaptive mesh refinement
  
Input / output format

Binary star
  Two stars in close orbit
  
  
Star Cluster
  A group of stars. The mean distance between the stars in smaller 
  than the mean distance between stars in the galaxy disks. Two types 
  of star clusters exist: globular clusters, open clusters

Dense stellar systems
 
Interstellar Medium
  The matter between the stars in a galaxy. 

Interstellar Cloud
  Generic name for an accumulation of gas, plasma and dust. A denser 
  region of the insterstellar medium
  
Molecular Cloud
  A type of insterstellar cloud whose density and size permits the
  formation of molecules,
 
Gravity Domain

Hydrodynamics

Star  


Stellar Evolution
  
ZAMS, zero age main sequence
  Start of the main sequence in the evolution of a star. Stable stage
  after formation of the star from a collapsing gas cloud
  
Main sequence star
  A star that derives its energy from the conversion of hydrogen into 
  helium in its core.
    
Star cluster
  
  
Metallicity
  Proportion of star matter made up of chemical elements other than 
  hydrogen and helium.
  
Galaxy

Star Core

Star Envelope





  
  
